Welcome to this course on
Machine Learning Algorithms.
My name is Denis Batalov,
I've been with Amazon 13
years and currently work as
a principle solutions architect
specializing in Machine Learning,
and I even have a
PhD in this field.
You are now ready to
start diving into
machine learning
algorithms, exciting times.
Many customers are
struggling with
understanding how to translate
their business problems into
an IT solution that
somehow incorporates
machine learning.
So in this course,
we're going to review
the different types
of machine learning
algorithms and the
problems they solve.
Perhaps you've already heard
about supervised learning,
unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning,
and deep learning.
By the end of this course,
you should be able to speak
confidently about
these categories of
ML algorithms with
your customers and
help them determine the category
that fits their problem.
So let's get going.
Before we can intelligently
speak of Machine Learning,
let's recall what
artificial intelligence
or machine intelligence
is all about.
A system exhibiting
intelligent behavior
normally needs to possess
two fundamental faculties.
First is the ability to
acquire and
systematize knowledge.
This is relying on the so-called
inductive reasoning or
coming up with rules that would
explain the individual
observations.
Of course simple facts or
truths need to be
acquired as well.
But if a rule can be learned so
that many truths can
be derived from it,
it would be easier to remember
a single rule, wouldn't it?
For example, as
you hear me speak,
you don't need to constantly
remind yourself that there is
no life person in front of you
because you know how
video recordings work.
Now, the second faculty is
inference or the ability to
use the acquired
knowledge to derive
the truths when needed
like making predictions,
choose actions, or
make complex plans.
This ability relies on
deductive reasoning,
which was popularized
so much by Conan Doyle.
You heard me use the
terms learning and
predictions when describing
these faculties,
and this is of
course no accident.
All machine learning algorithms
must possess them in some form.
Early algorithms in
the AI space were
relying primarily on
the second faculty of
inference by having humans
acquire and feed
all the necessary knowledge
into the machine.
This unfortunately proved to be
impossible for most
practical problems,
and that's why ML algorithms rule
the day, machines
learn automatically.
We're now ready to discuss the
different categories of ML
based on how the machine
learns and what it can infer.
Currently, when people
think of machine learning,
they typically think of
supervised learning because of
its wide applicability and
many successful applications.
It's called supervised because
there needs to be a supervisor,
a teacher or trainer
showing the right answers
during the learning.
No wonder we also call it
training a machine
learning model.
A model, because the algorithm is
effectively able to simulate
or model the teacher.
Oftentimes, the teacher
is simply not there
and all we're left with is
just observations or data.
Can something useful be learned
from the data in such a case?
You guessed it. This is
the domain of the so-called
unsupervised learning.
One typical example from
this category is a
clustering algorithm,
which divides the
observations into
what appear to be
different clusters.
We will see others later.
I should point out
that there exists
so-called mixed or
semi-supervised algorithms,
but let's not over
complicate things for now.
Another kind of learning
that has been gaining in
popularity recently is
the so-called
reinforcement learning.
In some sense, this type of
an algorithm is
attempting to solve
the complete AI
problem of building
an agent capable of
exhibiting entire
intelligent behaviors,
not just making
isolated decisions.
This is why it's an
exciting area of research,
but that's what makes it also
difficult in applied
practical settings.
In reinforcement learning,
the agent controlled by the
algorithm is interacting
with the possibly completely
unknown environment
and is learning optimal
actions via trial and error.
Here, there's no
explicit teacher telling
the agent what is the right
action at any given time.
Instead, the agent is getting
an often delayed reward or
penalty called reinforcement,
and is designed to maximize
long-term rewards.
Think of playing a computer game
with possibly unknown rules,
but your goal is to
get maximum points.
Not surprisingly,
this approach has
been rather popular in game-play
from early successes with
simple games like tic
tac toe in the 1960's,
to bag gammon in 1990's,
down to the very recent and
highly publicized triumph
of ML over the game of Go.
Now, let's look closer
at supervised learning.
Suppose we want a machine
learning algorithm
to distinguish between
circles and squares,
a supervised learning algorithm
would require many examples of
both figures and a teacher
who would tell it which is which.
After the training is finished,
a successful learning
algorithm would be able
to decide on its own whether
any given figure is a circle or
square with sufficient accuracy,
hopefully substantially
better than random guessing.
It would do so even
for circles or
squares that it has never
seen during training,
and this is ultimately the
power of supervised learning.
Do the correct answer is always
need to come from
a human teacher?
The notion of a teacher
may be generalized to
any complex system or
phenomena that
consists of machines,
humans, or natural processes.
Here, you see a Rube
Goldberg machine
to represent this complex system.
You can view this system
as a function that accepts
input parameters and produces
an outcome of sorts.
The known outcomes form the
so-called ground truths,
and this set of
historic observations
is our training dataset.
We then train the
machine learning model
by feeding it this
training dataset.
The resulting model
is set to predict
the same outcome based on
previously unseen
input parameters.
Hopefully, the model
prediction is the
same or close to what
the original system
would have produced.
The reason we're
interested in building
such models is that the
original system is either
impossible or expensive
to procure and scale
or takes too long to produce
the outcome which we
want to obtain sooner.
If the predicted value is of
binary nature as was the case
with circles and squares,
we say that the model is
performing a binary
classification,
in other words, labeling
the observation in
two possible ways.
This is just a special case of
multi-class prediction
where the data point
can belong to one of
many different and
mutually exclusive classes
such as circles,
squares, or triangles.
Mutual exclusivity is tricky to
assure though as this
picture makes clear.
Sometimes it's entirely
a matter of perspective.
Now, if the variable being
predicted is numeric,
then the model is set to be
solving a regression problem.
In other words, determining
the unknown value of
the dependent variable
based on input parameters.
Let us now look at some examples.
For instance, we might
have historical records of
volcano eruptions and
various observations
and measurements
leading up to them.
We can imagine training
a machine learning model
capable of predicting
future eruptions.
The teacher, with a
source of truth in
this case is simply
nature itself.
Another example is when we
want the model to predict
impending equipment failure so
that we could make
pro active repairs,
this is known as
predictive maintenance.
Similarly, we may want to
build a model that predicts
which of our clients
are about to stop purchasing
our services possibly
leaving for a competitor,
this is known as customer
churn prediction.
In these examples, all we
need to do to obtain a
good training dataset with
properly labeled
observations is to
systematically record
historical observations,
together with observed value of
variables we ultimately
want to predict.
You will eventually
know when a volcano
erupts or when your
equipment breaks down.
That is only possible if
the real system we're
trying to model
is already functioning on
a regular basis and
is easy to observe.
If say we want to train
a model to label people
in photos as either
smiling or frowning,
then we would first need
to have someone go through
a large number of photos
and label them manually.
If such human labeling process
was not already in place,
obtaining a training dataset
could be difficult
and time-consuming.
Fortunately, tools to crowdsource
human decisions are
available such as
Amazon Mechanical Turk
or similar offerings
from AWS partners such as
figure eight and others.
So how many different
supervised learning
algorithms are there.
There's literally hundreds
of them in existence,
so there's no point in
mentioning them all.
Instead, we can focus
on a few families of
algorithms that are most
popular and have proven
to be successful.
One of the earliest and
simplest algorithms
is based on learning parameters
of a linear function,
likely in a
multi-dimensional space.
You've already seen an
example of regression where
we find the linear function
that best fits the data.
When it comes to
predicting a category,
or a class as in
circles or squares,
we typically want to find
a hyperplane also known as
a decision boundary
that best separates
the data samples belonging to
the classes as shown
in this picture.
If there exists a linear surface
that separates the two classes,
we say that they are
linearly separable.
This is rarely the
case in practice,
however so some errors
must be expected.
To arrive at the
binary classifier,
we can apply a logistic function
to the output of a
linear combination
of input parameters in order to
restrict the values to the
range from zero to one.
This forms the basis of
the so-called logistic
regression algorithm.
In fact, Amazon SageMaker has
a built-in algorithm
called linear learner,
which is effectively
a combination
of linear and
logistic regression.
But other linear
algorithms exist as well.
You may have heard about
Support Vector Machines or SVMs
which strive to find a hyperplane
with maximum margin
between classes.
More modern variants
of the algorithm also
introduce non-linearity
with kernel functions.
So strictly speaking would not
belong to pure linear
methods anymore.
Perceptron is
another rather simple linear
classifier that forms
the foundational unit of
the so-called artificial
neural networks,
which we'll look at
later in this course.
As I pointed out earlier,
in most practical settings,
we're not dealing with
linearly separable classes
as demonstrated here.
A circular decision
boundary would work here,
but so would a
square-shaped one aligned
with coordinate axis shown here.
This is exactly the
decision boundary used by
algorithms that end up
constructing the
so-called decision trees.
In order to make
a classification,
we start with the root
of the tree and descend
through the decision nodes
until we arrive at
a classification.
In this example, points with
X coordinate outside of the range
from X1 to X2 are immediately
classified as red.
But for those in the range,
we need to additionally
consult the y-coordinate and
check against Y1 and Y2 values.
Instead of constructing
a single tree,
the algorithms from the
tree family often construct
many trees and combine their
predictions in some ways.
Algorithms such as Random Forest
and XGboost are based
on these approaches.
In fact, Amazon SageMaker
includes the XGboost algorithm.
It is based on the
idea of building
a strong classifier out of
many weak classifiers in
the form of decision trees.
Such an approach is
called boosting.
XGboost is a general-purpose
supervised algorithm.
Factorization Machines algorithm
on the other hand works
best when we deal with large
amounts of spars data,
such as the case with the
problem of click prediction for
online advertising or
recommendations in general.
Factorization Machines is
also built into SageMaker.
As usual, many other approaches
and algorithms exist as well.
For example, we could define
the decision boundary to be
polynomial as in circular
or parabolic boundaries.
Of course, we'll come back to
neural networks later
in this course.
Let us now examine the
unsupervised learning algorithms.
Clustering is an
especially popular type
of an unsupervised algorithm.
Given a collection
of data points,
we're trying to divide them
into groups or clusters with
the assumption that
points belonging to
the same cluster are
somehow similar,
whereas those belonging to
different clusters are
somehow dissimilar.
We're still required to give
some guidance to the algorithms
such as specifying the number
of clusters we're looking for.
One problem with clustering
algorithms is that
we usually don't know how
many clusters to pick.
Here's an example of the result
if we request just two clusters.
But depending on various
parameters and distance measures,
a differently tuned
algorithm might
provide a different answer for
the same two clusters requested.
If for this dataset we
request four different
clusters instead,
we might get something
that looks like this.
This points to another
problem with such algorithms,
it is ultimately up to
us how to interpret
the results and assign
meaning to the
discovered clusters.
Another entirely
different family of
unsupervised algorithms
attempts to detect
anomalies or generally
find outliers in the data.
In this picture, we see the
red green and blue lines
representing different
sensory readouts
of the electrocardiogram,
while the top magenta
line corresponds to
the anomaly scores produced by
the algorithm after
observing the data.
The higher the score,
the more pronounced
the anomaly is.
There's no explicit teacher
labeling the historic
data as anomalous,
instead the algorithm
learns on its
own what normal looks like by
simply observing the data.
One anomaly detection
algorithm was
developed by scientists
working at Amazon.
So it's worth taking
a closer look.
It's called Random Cut Forest.
The algorithm works
by constructing
a forest of the so-called
random cut trees.
Each tree is constructed by
a recursive procedure which
first surrounds the data points
with a bounding box and
then cuts or splits at
along the coordinate axis by
picking cut points randomly.
The procedure is repeated until
every point is sorted into a
particular leaf of the tree.
For full details you can
read the paper presented on
the International Conference
for Machine Learning
in 2016.
Yet another example of
unsupervised algorithm is
the so-called topic modeling for
documents with text content.
The algorithm is the basis of
the eponymous feature in the
Amazon comprehend service.
Given a collection of documents,
news articles for example and
the number of topics we
would like to discover,
the algorithm produces
the top words
that appear to define the topic,
together with the
weight that each
of these words has in
relation to the topic.
In this case you see top words
that likely pertained to sports.
As with clustering in general,
the approach is sensitive
to the number of
topics requested and its still
requires us to assign
the meaning to
the discovered topic such as
health, sports or politics.
To summarize, Amazon
SageMaker includes
a popular clustering
algorithm called k-means.
It's an Amazon improvement over
the well-known and
scalable algorithm
called Web-scale k-means.
Another member of the
unsupervised family is called
Principal Component
Analysis or PCA for short.
Likewise available in SageMaker.
It's especially
useful in reducing
the dimensionality of
the dataset and is often
used as a feature
engineering step
before passing the data to
a supervised algorithms.
Latent Dirichlet
Allocation or LDA
is the name of a particular
topic modelings algorithm.
A variant is used by the topic
modeling feature of Amazon
comprehend and the algorithm
is also available in sage maker.
The Random cut forest algorithm
for anomaly detection
is available in
SageMaker as well as an Amazon
Kinesis Data Analytics,
for easy application
to streaming data.
Kinesis Data Analytics also
features hotspot detection,
another example of
an unsupervised learning
algorithm which
you can use to identify
relatively dense
regions in your data.
Okay, time for a quick quiz.
Suppose we have a
problem of predicting
future values of a
time series data.
For example, suppose that we
want to predict the future
sales of some item.
We have observed historical
daily sales figures up to
today and now want to
predict what the sales figures
would be in the future.
Is this a supervised or
unsupervised learning task?
At first we might be tempted to
answer that it is unsupervised,
similar to Anomaly Detection,
because there does not appear
to be a teacher anywhere.
But this is a bit of
a trick question.
You'd see all observations of
historical sales leading to
a particular day D in
the past can be viewed
as a training sample or
observation with the
correct label being
the actual recorded sale for
day D, eight in this case.
In other words, just like with
the historical volcano eruptions,
the teacher here is the
external environment.
Finally, it's time
for us to look at
deep learning which is really
a resurgence of neural networks.
To understand them,
let's first look at
an element of neural
networks called a neuron.
Through a neuron you
see in this diagram,
a data sample is seen as
a vector of numeric input values,
which are then linearly
combined with its weights.
In other words, the neuron is
computing a weighted
sum and then applies
a so-called activation
function to
produce output in the
range from zero to one.
With proper thresholding this
can work as a binary classifier.
Remember the perceptron that I
mentioned earlier in this course?
This is effectively
what a perceptron is.
Except, a single
neuron would not be
sufficient for practical
classification needs.
Instead, we could combine
them into fully-connected
layers to produce
the so-called artificial
neural networks
also known as
multilayer perceptrons.
In a feedforward pass,
the network is turning the
input values into output,
which forms the prediction
of the algorithm.
A special technique called
backpropagation is
then used to reduce
the error between the
desired or true output
and the actual one
produced by the network.
Originally, these neural
networks were inspired
by some aspects of a
biological nervous system but
at this point there are really
a computational apparatus for
complex dependency modeling
and function approximation.
What I showed so far
is an example of
a traditional neural network
prior to the advent
of deep-learning.
Since a few years
back we have seen
a resurgence of neural
networks rebranded as
deep-learning due to
several important advances
that relate to the
algorithms themselves.
Accumulation of large amounts
of data for training and
emergence of powerful specialized
hardware such as GPUs,
which are able to crunch
this massive amount
of data by passing
it through very deep networks in
terms of the sheer
number of layers.
Some of the results proved
rather spectacular,
enabling many
exciting applications
such as an image and
speech recognition,
natural language
processing and so on.
So how deep is deep?
Here's an example that is rather
puny by modern standards.
In fact, networks with over
1,000 layers have been
experimented with.
Such networks have billions of
parameters and many millions
of images could be
used in training.
The shear computational power
required to train such
networks is not cheap to
procure and this is where eta BFS
comes handy with GPU
based ec2 instances,
housing powerful chipsets such
as NVIDIA Volta in the P3 family.
More importantly, you can
distribute the training
across multiple GPUs
in order to speed it
up and AWS makes it rather
economical to set up
the hardware cluster
just for the time of
training not having to
worry about expensive hardware
sitting idly afterwards.
One important breakthrough in
deep learning was
the invention of
the so-called Convolutional
Neural Networks
or CNNs for short,
which are especially useful
for image processing.
The main idea behind CNNs is
that it is able to relate
nearby pixels in the
image instead of
treating them as completely
independent inputs,
which was the case prior to CNNs.
A special operation called
convolution is applied to
the entire subsections of
the image and more
importantly the parameters of
these convolutions are also
being learned in the process.
If several convolutional layers
are stacked one after another,
each convolutional layer learns
to recognize patterns of
increasing complexity as we
move through the layers.
We don't have time in
this course to dive
into the details of
how CNN function.
Our goal is to understand
some of the common use cases.
Of course recognizing
objects and images and
generally classifying images
is a very common use case.
But CNNs enabled
many other exciting
applications related to images.
For example, they can be
used for semantic segmentation or
classification of
individual pixels as
belonging or not belonging
to detected objects,
a motorcyclist in this case.
Furthermore, they
have been used for
other novel applications such as
artistic style transfer,
where one image,
here a photo of a cat
is modified by applying
an artistic style to it which was
previously extracted from
another image
typically a painting.
In the bottom right corner,
they have even been used to
generate photos of cats.
These cats look
photorealistic and
yet none of them actually
existed in real life.
If we take the output of
a neuron and feed it as
input to itself or neurons
from previous layers,
we are creating the so-called
recurrent neural networks.
It's as if the neuron
remembers its output from
the previous iteration thus
creating a kind of memory.
On the right-hand side
you see just one unit
of a more complex
network called LSTM,
which stands for Long
Short-Term Memory.
It is commonly used for
speech recognition
and translation.
In fact, LSTMs are used
as a building block to
the so-called
Sequence to Sequence
modeling which is used in
neural machine translation.
A high-level architecture in
the diagram shows how does
include house input is
being translated
into the greenhouse.
Amazon released an entire library
called Sockeye for state of
the art sequence to sequence
modeling tasks that customers
can use in their projects.
We just looked at convolutional
and recurrent neural networks
which are the two most
common families of
neural networks.
But as you can see here
many network topologies exist
and they're being studied.
Amazon SageMaker
conveniently provides
a built-in algorithm
for image classification based
on Resnet, a kind of CNN,
but it also provides a sequence
to sequence algorithm,
a neural topic modeling algorithm
to complement Latent
Dirichlet allocation
and also DeepAR forecasting
algorithm for time series
prediction which we
already looked at.
Remember the quiz? So our
deep learning algorithm's
supervised or unsupervised?
Well, they can be either.
The algorithms shown in the
slide are all supervised
except for neural topic
modeling which the icons
on the left indicate.
Deep learning algorithms
have even been
employed as a key component
of a reinforcement
learning algorithm.
Well, this concludes
our review of
various Machine
Learning algorithms.
Hopefully, you've come to
understand the
different categories of
Machine Learning
algorithms and how they
relate to the business
problems they help solve.
Thanks for listening. You
can follow me on Twitter
and please tune into other
courses in this series.